you know why i'm clean-shaven
because i went to a job interview today
the job pays minimum wage
and does not require any university
diploma
and i'm not going to get it
i think if they offer it to me i'd
probably have to refuse to be clear but
just so you know just so you know um
had a productive conversation yesterday
with a
young man he says he's in his late 20s
about philosophy
politics and life
if you're still in your teenage years
when watching this it will probably
sound
completely meaningless to you to have an
older guy like me
say you know what philosophy it's not
about
logic it's not about abstract reasoning
philosophy is really about life
philosophy is really about how
you are going to live your life how we
are going to live
our lives and you know what politics
is not about abstract reasoning it's not
about logic there's a sense in which
politics is not even about right or
wrong
or correct or incorrect politics also
it's really about life
it's really about how you're going to
live your life however
i understand if you're 19 years old
hearing this sounds a complete
to you
all right because when you say when you
say this is about living my life
are you talking about uh which bakery i
go to to buy my bread
are you talking about you know going
skateboarding in your spare time like
whatever it is you're like
i understand when you're a young person
what you think of
as life and what that means to you it's
something quite different from what it
means to
middle-aged people uh like myself
there's another bias
that creeps into all of this discourse
discourse about philosophy
discourse about politics the discourse
about taking philosophy and politics and
life and putting them together and
getting something out of it getting
something out of the next five years
of your life for example you know
there's a very strange bias that creeps
in
depending upon at what age
you got involved in the game right
so you know some people some people
start reading about communism when
they're like 12 years old
all right there are red diaper babies
there are people who are raised with
communism
from birth and there are people who like
at the end of high school
their last year they haven't even heard
these terms i
think i've told this story before i had
a history professor
at university and he said he had a
student come up to him
at the end of a lecture so this is a
university level lecture and he said
um during the lecture today you
mentioned
world war ii so does that
imply there was some other war before
that
this was a white english-speaking
canadian
born and raised in canada he had
literally never heard of world war ii
before
he had literally never heard of world
war one before he was at university
level
there there are people who get involved
in politics late their people start
thinking about
philosophy late in life in a lot of ways
they bring a very detached
mature perspective to to politics but
getting involved away
and there are people who form really
deep
sentimental and emotional connections to
concepts
to words to historical figures because
they get involved with this stuff early
now look there are advantages to getting
involved early there are advantages to
being becoming a well-educated person
early in life rather than like there are
also disadvantages
to help you visualize this buddhism
imagine a 30 year old man who's
who's barely heard of buddhism he's seen
it in some kung fu movies
he has no familiarity with asian culture
asian languages or buddhism
and for in his 30s he starts getting
interested for the first time
and he walks to the library to get out
some books on buddhism and he walks to a
buddhist temple
and has a conversation with a buddhist
monk he is going to show up
with a rational mature attitude
towards buddhism even just implicitly he
is going to be demanding that buddhism
live up to his expectations as a
rational well-educated middle-aged man
he's going to be looking at these books
he's going to be talking to this monk
and like without even making a conscious
effort there's like a filter there
he's going to be filtering out uh purely
superstitious
um purely effective elements of the
okay this is real uh anthropological
jargon purely performative
aspects of religion ritual is not he's
not gonna in his 30s
show up and say you know what i need a
magical
ritual to make me feel better about
having a broken arm you know they do
that in buddhism it's a real example
you know he's not going to show you know
what i need a ritual
to drive the ghosts out of my own no
right he's going to be approaching this
in a certain way
um and he may not be aware of it and i
often see the buddhist monks
and the university professors and so on
and they all react to it without anyone
spelling it oh here's someone
approaching where we have to present the
religion and the philosophy and this
very rationalize
okay what if the same guy
had gone to the library and gone to the
buddhist temple at age 16.
it's different he would have brought
something different to it he would have
taken something different from it
and his own desires his own needs would
have shaped the discourse in a very
different way
okay what if he was born into a buddhist
family
what if he was first engaging with the
religion
as a child as a toddler even
right the engagement with superstition
completely different
the types of questions you're asking and
the answers you're being given
when it's your grandmother answering
your question
where do people go after they die and
you're a small child and she's an old
woman
it's completely different from your
you're a man in your 30s
and you go in you have to say hey you
know i've i got these books at the
library and it says you believe in
reincarnation tell me can you can you
explain technically how does this and
that happen what do you
completely different experience right
yeah this is a case in which the
observer shapes the experience more than
they know
right you're shaping the experience by
the questions you're asking
the answers that you're rejecting the
answers that aren't good which books you
take off the shelf
the relationships of authority right
sometimes
that are completely unseen right
if you got involved with left-wing
politics in your thirties
politics as a teenager if you were born
and raised in left-wing politics
these things shape you in a very
different way
but also what you know about left-wing
politics
and how you feel about left-wing
politics will be very different
because you have been shaping the
politics and the philosophy at every
stage
just as much as or even more than our
example
taken from buddhism um
a lot of you people in the audience
young or old
you won't be able to easily relate to my
warning
when i say to this guy in his 20s again
and again
stop thinking in terms of abstractions
on a chalkboard
stop thinking about politics and
philosophy like you're
drawing a geometric theorem on a
chalkboard and start thinking
about how you're going to live your own
life first and foremost right
to some of you that may sound as trite
as a hallmark card
you don't you don't get the point i'm
trying to make you okay
some of you will not really say do we
start
with a chalkboard and an abstract
theorem
in trying to define homosexuality and
trying to come to a clear concise
conclusion
what is the true meaning of being a
homosexual
and do we then choose to live our lives
trying to satisfy that ideal trying to
live up to it
no no most people progress through
stages
of uncertainty and conflicted feelings
they may have a period of time where
they feel like they're bisexual and then
decide that they're gay or they don't
feel that they know
or they they think they're completely
straight but then they happen to have
one romantic relationship where they
fall in love with someone of the same
gender and they question their sexuality
right
there's a whole role of desire
and ignorance and uncertainty and doubt
and self-doubt
and that's how people live through their
sexuality right
and then at some point in that process
at the end of that process the middle
april
they can stop and look at the chalkboard
and say oh hey what is the definition
of homosexuality and what are my
feelings and what am i experiencing then
where do i fit
but it's really an afterthought right
why does even matter
so we dealt with it something like this
this example of a guy
he thinks of himself as heterosexual
he's married to a woman
but he does actually have sexual affairs
with men he only has oral sex with men
he doesn't have anal sex
should he think of himself as straight
or gay or bisexual this may sound like a
joke to you
think about what i'm challenging the guy
on the other side to do think about what
i'm trying to get into
i'm trying to get him to realize that he
is again
and again proceeding from abstract
theorems
on a chalkboard he's living his life
as if the definition of socialism is
something written on a chalkboard the
definition of anarchism
the definition of communism and then he
turns around and looks at the real world
he's demanding that the real world
satisfy this definition
he's demanding of himself he sees his
role in life
as living up to these definitions he's
beholden to
the definitions the abstract reasoning
on the chalkboard
is primary for him and for me it's not
even secondary
it's less than secondary it's nothing
all right
this is a really pragmatic element of
nihilism
what what is the meaning of
homosexuality what's the point
of taking a word like this and
describing yourself what's the point of
someone stepping forward
at their office and telling their
co-worker that they're gay
all right it has nothing to do with any
definition on any chalkboard or in any
dictionary you've got a guy he wears a
nice suit to work every day
he has a female co-worker at first they
just go out to lunch with a group of
co-workers
and then the two of them get along and
they start going out to lunch just the
two of them
and at some point he tells her that he's
gay
all right now being gay means different
things different people maybe this guy
maybe his actual experience is that he's
had sex with more women than he has men
could mean all kinds of things right you
know his actual
lived experience of homosexuality you
could get into all the nitty gritty of
it and what he's dealing with now and
what what his life was like when he was
a teenager
and the woman might even be shocked
because maybe she's seen on facebook or
on instagram that in the past
he had a girlfriend or something you
know they're all kinds of this is
human complexity what what's the point
of
one human being letting another know
that they're that they're gay
obvious it's going to shape the future
of that relationship oh okay
she's going to think about him and her
relationship with him
in a different way the point is not for
the
word to give flesh and blood reality
to the abstraction written on the
chalkboard the word
functions only for me to express
something to you about myself
if you call yourself a communist
if you call yourself a socialist you're
telling me nothing about communism
you're telling me nothing about the
facts of economics or the facts
you're telling me something about you
you're telling me something about who
you are what kind of person you are
above all else
ethically you're telling me also about
what kind of person you want to be
what you're going to do in the future
what kind of difference in the world
you're trying to make it is just
self-expression
it's self-expression there's there's no
question of trying to satisfy
a perfect definition of communism
or perfect definition of socialism and
it is not just the case that it's
pointless
for someone like him this younger man
was talking about it's not just the case
that it's pointless
for him to engage in this tit-for-tat
game of saying well
how precisely do you define communism
and for him to then claim that the
ideals of communism or the economic
system of communism
are not besmirched by the real world
experience of what happened in the
soviet union
or communist china under the
dictatorship of mao zedong right
that is not harmless that's what i'm
saying
anyone who meets him and listens to him
saying that
who sees him playing those games on the
chalkboard right
they're going to react to that the same
way i react
when i meet someone on the internet who
starts putting forward
claims about the relationship between
race and iq
when i meet someone on the internet who
starts putting forward the theory
that an extraordinary number of jewish
people
have won the nobel prize for the
following
reasons when i meet someone on the
internet putting forward the theory that
the buddha
had blonde hair and blue eyes all the
time
people raised questions and make factual
assertions and open up
lines of political and philosophical
argument and they are not explicitly
telling you that they're a neo-nazi
they're not explicitly telling you that
they're all
alt-right and spend all their time
reading crazy alt-right conspiracy
theories
they may even just make statements about
the history of the roman empire
or the history of ancient egypt you know
like seriously
but if you know your stuff if you know
this material right away you can tell
whoa
this person is making an excuse for
something that
only neo-nazis and all right people make
excuse for
this person is engaging a sin that
reflects what they've been reading
where they come from in terms of their
intellectual background right
and that's who this person really is all
right so this young man
when he is playing games in this way
with offering justifications for
communism when he's saying
positive things about the ideals of
lenin
even though he combines that with
critical statements about lenin and
critical statements
okay the actual net effect of what he's
saying
it just makes me think he is a crypto
communist and many people who watched my
interaction with him and watched the
comments
popping up they said whoa this guy's
whole audience
seems to be comprised of cryptocommunist
and that's how the internet works you
know like
attracts like the type of people who
would
enjoy hearing those kinds of
mealy-mouthed middle-of-the-road
statements
rationalizing what mouse dong did and
trying to rescue
the pure definition of communism from
the
chalkboard
a fundamental point here is that
thinking in the first person thinking
about yourself
and your desires first and foremost
all right and thinking about the
abstract meanings of words on a
chalkboard
not even secondarily but really really
it doesn't enter into our philosophizing
and political theorizing
at all right thinking about yourself
as a creative person as a destructive
person
as someone who's gonna change history
from your
tiny pinpoint on the map and the tiny
chronological span of your life
and nobody knows how long it is right
yes in theory
you could get hit by a car tomorrow very
unlikely
but you know it's not
reasonable to rationalize how you're
living your life
here and now in terms of grandiose
abstractions
whether you think of these as platonic
abstractions or
marxist abstractions frankly that exist
at all times
for all people right it doesn't make
sense
to rationalize what you're doing here
and now with reference to some utopia
that's supposedly going to exist on
earth more than a thousand years
into the future let's put a human face
on that
i've considered i've considered applying
for
and getting israeli citizenship
to live in israel would be very
difficult for me politically
i think in israel ironically i would
probably only hang out with far
left-wing people those with all people
willing to talk to me at probably with
left-wing
vegans you'd be living in a war zone and
it's a war where i really don't have a
lot of sympathy for either side in case
the war i'm you know you guys have some
sense of going i'm an atheist
i'm a very active vocal atheist so it's
very difficult for me to say anything
good about any government
that is openly theocratic all right
i'm not real sympathetic for the
government of saudi arabia
the modern state of israel it's better
than saudi arabia
but it's a much worse government than
the government of switzerland
admittedly the swiss constitution opens
by invoking the name of god
switzerland is not a perfectly atheistic
unfortunately unfortunately
i wish with someone who were 100
atheists but it's not all right with
that digression
with that digression aside um
a well-deserved boss hold on
would it make sense for me to live my
life in israel now
with reference to some future utopia in
which
all the jews have ceased believing in
judaism
all the muslims have ceased to believe
in islam
and everyone embraces each other and in
brotherhood
even if you believe that's the
inevitable future
if you believe that's coming 500 years
from now
300 years would be too too close right
is it five years is it a thousand years
even if you believe in that not as
something probable
but it's something definite and certain
and inevitable
right it would be a gross
bizarre aberration in your life to live
your own life to make your decisions
here and now with reference to that
future you dealt with that future
outcome which is of course incredibly
improbable you've got to make your
decisions here and now based on who you
are
reality in the world around you and what
you can accomplish
in the next five years right
what sense does it make for someone to
live their life and make their decisions
here and now with reference to a future
communist utopia
a future socialist utopia or in this
kid's case a future
anarchist utopia and to treat that to
treat that as a
certainty not as a fantasy
but as something they believe in as
inevitable
as certain and then to make your
decisions about the real world and what
you can accomplish here and now
with with references to to live your
whole life
in the shadow of this unreal
ideal
you guys have heard me say before you
know atheism is not enough
it's not enough to just reject the
belief
in a particular god or particular
religious system you have to challenge
the religiosity
of our ways of thinking about everything
right you have to challenge these fixed
ideals
that haunt us that shape our lives when
we're dreaming
as well as when we're awake all right
what you have to do is learn to live
with the dynamism
of doubt all right
do you think that one day in the future
all muslims
will just stop believing in islam and
will embrace
jewish people as their equals will
happily
let their sons and daughters intermarry
with jewish people will see
no invidious distinction between muslims
between muslims and jews do you see that
do you see that as the inevitable future
you think that's
definite you think that's certain
wouldn't it be different to live your
life acknowledging that that's a
beautiful fantasy
but that there's every reason to doubt
that
wouldn't it be better to live with
constant gnawing
doubt about just how bad the conflict is
and that it could get
worse and that it could get worse and
worse
and worse and that the future could
actually be worse than the past
that the future for the jewish people
could be
worse than what happened in world war ii
isn't that something to fear isn't that
something to doubt
right all this horseshit that comes out
of marxism
all these certainties all these fables
about the future right the problem is
the impact
they have on the present here and now
right there's this old catchphrase in
the academic study of history
i'm sorry i forget who said it first
it's probably john dewey or someone
really boring like that
you know we study history
uh not to take something away from the
past
but for what it adds to the present
right
the problem is that people live with
these fantasies about the future with
these convictions
about what's inevitable and certain
about the future
and it really takes something away from
the present
all right um the light motif of that
discussion
was my saying to this kid look
the process we're engaged in here is not
about setting up a perfect definition of
socialism
on the chalkboard a perfect geometric
theorem
it's not about defining these concepts
precisely
so that you can believe in them all
right
the point is to critique and debunk and
discard
all ideologies all ideals so that you
can start believing
in yourself the most
fundamental insight of my teenage years
was the realization
that all authority is mere
authorship karl marx
was at one time a struggling author
just trying to write a hit book okay
some of you in the audience will know
what that's like i'm right now trying to
write a book i hope i hope as many as 1
000 people over
500 people i'd be happy with trying to
hit book
on a tiny scale trying to write a book
that's appealing to and meaningful for
a tiny tiny niche market and i pointed
this out in an earlier
video he had very specific examples of
authors who'd been successful in in the
decades
leading up to this and he modeled what
he was trying to do as a creative writer
as an author and he came up with these
stories
with these fables and millions of people
died because these stories set the human
imagination on fire
okay but they're just stories
he's just an author he's just a
storyteller
and so are you so are you and you
and you okay there's a very real sense
in which the whole world's history
begins and ends
with your life your potential
to make a difference in the world what
you can accomplish
in the next five years that has to be
your concern not any geometric theorem
not any definition of any set of
concepts
written up on a chalkboard